The theme I would like to address
this morning is
“Guard Against Materialism.”
And I invite you to take
another look at our day’s text
at Matthew 6:24.
Here couched in the Sermon on the Mount,
Jesus addressed his disciples and the crowds
with an all-inclusive truth.
Notice how that verse begins:
“No one can slave for two masters.”
Are there any exceptions to that rule?
According to Jesus,
according to Jehovah God,
no—no exceptions.
But who are the two competing
and very different masters
that Jesus was referring to?
The end of the verse answers
where he refers to “God” and “Riches.”
Did you notice that “Riches”
is presented here in the Bible
with a capital “R” to begin?
Now, that’s interesting when we
notice Jesus’ other references to riches
in the New World Translation
where the “r” is not capitalized
—lowercase “riches.”
For example,
when Jesus refers later
to the deceptive power of riches
that can choke the word,
lowercase “r.”
Or when he referred
to unrighteous riches
that we need to use wisely,
lowercase “r.”
So why, here at Matthew 6:24
and in the parallel account
at Luke 16:13,
did the New World Bible
Translation Committee
choose to capitalize the “R”?
Well, the study edition
of the New World Translation helps us here.
It tells us at Matthew 6:24
that the Greek word used here
is traditionally translated “Mammon”
—that could also be rendered
as “Riches” or “Money.”
And then the comment adds this gem:
It says that in this verse
‘“Riches” is personified as a master,
or a kind of false god.’
Well, we’ve seen that to be true, haven’t we?
For generations humans
have tended to elevate riches:
good old money, riches
—lowercase “m” and lowercase “r.”
And they’ve elevated it
to be a god that has,
as our commenters commented on,
enslaved millions.
What was the teaching
Jesus was highlighting for his followers?
It’s that we
—Christians—
cannot give God
the exclusive devotion that he deserves
and at the same time be devoted
to gathering up more material possessions.
That’s a very strong warning.
So that leads us
to two questions that we could consider
with the balance
of our time this morning:
What is materialism?
And how can you and I guard
against falling into that snare
of gathering up more riches
and making this our god?
Merriam-Webster’s Dictionary
offers this definition of materialism:
It’s “a preoccupation with
[or a tendency to seek after]
“or stress upon material [things]
rather than intellectual
or spiritual things.”
But I found a definition
in the publications of the faithful slave
that I think is even better
for all of us in the context of Jesus’ words.
The 1978 Yearbook,
on page 9, expressed it this way:
“It has been said
that materialism is anything
“that stands between a person
and his worship of Jehovah.
“So it need not necessarily be
an expensive automobile,
“an ostentatious home
or a large bank account.
“It could be anything
that absorbs a person’s time and attention
so that he neglects
the worship due to Jehovah.”
Well, that’s the point, isn’t it,
that Jesus was trying
to stress for his followers?
Could materialism entrap any of us
who have chosen
to put Kingdom interests first
and have made
material sacrifices in order to do that?
Well, that question prompted me
to think of a faithful servant of Jehovah
outlined in the Bible book of Jeremiah
—Baruch.
Open, please, to Jeremiah chapter 45.
Now, as we think
about the faithful servant Jeremiah
and his secretary, Baruch,
we can imagine that they
made considerable sacrifices
to serve the interests
of Jehovah’s people at that time.
Baruch had a special privilege of service,
as do most of us here today,
but something distracted him.
Notice, please,
the reading at Jeremiah 45:3.
Here Jehovah pinpointed
what Baruch had said,
perhaps only in his heart,
only in his own thoughts.
Verse 3:
“You have said:
“‘Woe to me, for Jehovah
has added grief to my pain!
I am weary from my groaning,
and I have found no resting-place.’”
Baruch was tired.
He’d been serving Jehovah faithfully,
but his assignment was difficult,
perhaps stressful.
And it was going to be 18 more years
until the foretold destruction would come.
But was it his service to Jehovah
that was really the problem?
Notice what Jehovah identified,
as we read verse 5:
“But you are seeking
great things for yourself.
Stop seeking such things.”
Those “great things”
could have been material things.
It could have been
that he was ensnared by materialism.
If that was the case,
Jehovah’s warning
to stop seeking such things was timely.
Later on in that same verse,
Baruch was reminded that his life
—not his possessions, not his things—
was going to be the spoil
that Jehovah was going to provide
at the upcoming destruction.
Well, how can we guard against falling
into the snare of materialism?
Like Baruch, we from time to time
need to take a long hard look
at our personal view
of money and personal things.
The September 2015 issue
of the Awake! magazine
posed some questions for self-examination.
Here are just a few of them:
“Am I attracted to get-rich-quick schemes?
“Do I find it difficult
to be generous with my money?
“Does money make me feel important?
“Am I always thinking about money?
“Is my attitude toward money
adversely affecting
my health and family life?”
You know, real-life experiences
among our brothers and sisters
prove that we all need
to be thinking seriously about this matter.
Alex, one of our brothers,
got caught up in trading in the stock market,
thinking he could soon quit his job
and enter the pioneer service.
He was well-motivated,
but he got caught in a vortex
of studying offers and market reports.
He used his savings
and money borrowed from brokers
to buy stocks that the analysts
had predicted would quickly rise in value.
Do you know how the story plays out for Alex?
Months passed, the stocks never rebounded.
Alex lost his savings
and ended up having to sell his home.
What a painful consequence
of being deceived by this cruel master
—money.
Alex reflected on what took place,
and he said this:
“I caused my family great pain.
“I now know that anyone
who puts his trust in Satan’s system
will be profoundly disappointed.”
There was another experience
of a Sister Valentine from Jamaica
that caught my attention
when I was researching this point.
You may remember
the article that was published
in the January 1, 2006,
issue of The Watchtower,
“Bringing Up Eight Children in Jehovah’s Ways
Was a Challenge and a Joy.”
Our sister related an experience
that involved her view of material things.
Now, we keep in mind
that she was not well-to-do financially.
Imagine, a mother of eight
—the husband has abandoned her—
she’s raising them to serve Jehovah.
But does the fact that we
may have a little, financially speaking,
mean that we’re immune
to the trap of materialism?
In 1988,
Hurricane Gilbert devastated the island.
She wrote this:
“We left our home
for shelter in a safer place.
“During a lull in the storm,
my son and I left the refuge area
“to survey the wreckage
that was once our home.
“While poking around in the debris,
I spotted something I wanted to save.
“Suddenly, winds were howling again,
but I still held on to what I had salvaged.”
Her son spoke up,
“Mom, put down the television.
Are you Lot’s wife?”
Our sister commented
that that comment from her son
caught her
and returned her to her senses.
She dropped the rain-soaked TV,
and they ran for safety.
Sister Valentine did a self-examination.
She thought about what took place
at that moment.
She says:
“I recall that I risked my life for a TV.”
But it warmed her heart
that her son had the spiritual insight
to provide her
a warning at the right time.
Well,
it’s a good lesson for all of us, isn’t it?
No matter
what our economic situation may be,
we need to view money as a skillful tool
and use it for that purpose,
but not allow it to rule or control us.
We do not want
to ‘stab ourselves all over with many pains.’